Farah Alibi recording Sophia Johnson on the 18th of April 2024. Sophia can you
introduce yourself please. My name is Sophia Johnson I was born on the 14th of
July 1956 in Nairobi Kenya. You were born in East Africa can you tell me your
memories of living there? Sure, sure. Even though I was born in Kenya we were
British East Africa then and my family moved to Tanzania, Mwanza to start a
business or my grandfather did and we had soda factories in Mwanza and Arusha
and we also owned some land which we didn't quite rent to to the local
population but let them farm their food there to sell to the market so nothing
was there was no money to be made from that but it was land. Can I ask you about
how your family went from Kenya to Tanzania? I think my grandfather decided
he wanted to go to Mwanza to start a business. I can't recall it because
obviously I wasn't there but that was all my both no not my parents my father
my grandmother my grandfather were all born in Kenya but then they left to go
to Tanzania and I don't know the reason why. But you were born in Kenya? Yes. And so
how old were you when you when your family left Kenya? Oh immediately well my mother I
think was visiting from from Mwanza and of course I was born in Kenya but then
you know we were just East Africans there was I just a little permit to say
you were East African there was no passport per se in that time or if I
remember. So you could leave and go to one country there was a lot of fluidity in your
movement. Yes. Do you know what your family did in Kenya before moving to Mwanza?
They had a little factory a soda factory. In Nairobi? In Nairobi I believe but I
don't know nobody talks about that time anymore you know all I know is my my own
personal recollection of Mwanza. The family didn't talk about any of our
where we came from what we did what happened all I know is about we were in
Mwanza and that was that. So does that mean that you don't have any historical
knowledge of your ancestors how your grandparents came to India? No. Sorry East
Africa. Yeah. Because that's very common with our community. Yes. Nobody actually
remembers. No. I mean great great grandfather was 10 when he came to East
Africa but that's all I know and of course it's great great great. So you
would have been fourth generation? Yes. So that's a long established line in East Africa? Yes.
By that point? Yes. I mean we were Africans we didn't never thought of
ourselves as Indians because this was home. Home was never India. My mother was
born in Tanzania exactly so we were all Africa East Africans and of course
things changed. So can you tell me some of the memories you have of Mwanza then?
It was a lovely lovely town on the shores of Lake Victoria. Beautiful. Very
colonial. My grandfather was very big in the British colonial government. When you
say big? He was a it was a member of the Legislative Council in the British
government representing the Indians in East Africa in Africa in Tanzania. And so
when you say it was very colonial? It's a very colonial town you know a lot of
British there. I have no clue why but you know in those days you were not as
Indians or Africans you were not allowed to go into British facilities if you
know that you know you couldn't go into the clubs you couldn't go into the yoke
clubs into the golf clubs not allowed. So there was segregation? Of course
absolutely. But was it segregation with whites only? Were Indians and
Africans mixing or you able to go into each other's? We could go into it we
could go into brown and black communities but not in white. So it really was?
They were colonial until they left in 1960 and so even then even after 1960 we still had the
clubs where they allowed Indians in but not Africans. Why do you think Indians
were allowed in? Business people. Okay. And and because my father my grandfather was
in the government we were kind of honorary whites. Now I was I was very
young then so I don't remember I remember going to dances at the club you
know my grandmother was entertaining these ladies with their beautiful silver
and whatnot I I remember all that cutlery which came from Sheffield and
what then be I can't remember what it was we only saved one piece after what
happened in you know after what happened in 1971. Okay. We had a beautiful home huge
home family lived together the soda factories were in town and actually I
had a very privileged life I must say a very happy life. So you grew up in this
big house yeah and with this special status within that yes yes that gave
you access yes privileges and to white people basically in white society yes
and you imported cutlery from the UK yes and the crockery and you know so that it
was very much trying to be to the British standards yes yes and did your
grandmother wear her saris or was she dressed western western dress so would
you describe it as a complete copy of the colonial culture? Yes I would think so
with my grandfather certainly after my grandfather died she went back to wear
wearing her long dresses and a sari you know on her head. So it was because of your
grandfather that your grandmother actually wore western clothes? Yes.
Into that particular society of that world which was totally different from
our world and then the African world. But it was enabling you to have a quality of
life yes that you wouldn't have had otherwise no if you had stayed in saris
Yes because we were encouraged can I say this by the Aga Khan the old Aga Khan that
where you go into whichever country you go assimilate don't you know and start
wearing western clothes and because my grandfather was also president of the
Ismaili council so my grandmother started wearing dresses then all the
women followed her into a dress is not properly not not too short obviously
modest dressing but no saris or anything no. So did your grandmother did you sense
that your grandmother felt really quite comfortable being western or was she
always aware that she was never a westerner? I don't think she was but in
her heart she was always Indian but she was born in Kenya I mean you know she
never been to India in her life either so there was a culture but the culture
obviously that culture from India was brought into us you know to the food to
speak the language it was important but we were always kids in our family were
always taught to speak English have western food we were never allowed
Indian food it was totally different because it was a very strange household
where we there was a kids dining room there was an adults dining room I never
I think I went into the adults dining room once and then my grandfather would
hold all these sundowners on our terrace upstairs where the people were invited
when Princess Margaret visited sundowner when Hajjuan came sundowner he came to
our house I've got pictures. So you have your family hosted royalty? Yes. This
colonial contact yeah so your grandfather's really really high up. He was awarded the
MBE by the Queen for services to the British Empire. So it was very necessary
for you to fit in into the colonial system? Yes. How do you feel about that
retrospectively? Well I never thought that there was snobbish and you
know I've also lived in different countries now and you see the English I'm
sorry to say this when they're out there they sort of develop this inverted
snobbery and you may be a it's nothing but you think you know with the posh
voices I never you know I never actually thought of them as well okay skins
different so what. So the fact that your grandfather was part of this colonial
system yes that was causing a lot of inequality yes in East Africa yes do you
have any thoughts or feelings about that having belonged to it and grown up with
it? Well actually I didn't belong in a way when he died in 1960 not 1962 he died
then things start changing. And how did they start changing? Because after after
the after independence the British were going and you know we were there then
not many not many British then some who obviously working elsewhere but you know
we used to have a another beautiful colonial home in a place called Musoma
we used to go on our holidays there and every month of December we'd take the
car and go all the way to Uganda Kenya Tanzania through the Serengeti and back
to Monsa it was it was a that's what it was it was an idyllic life in a way my
father was lovely he loved adventure but then things start changing in 19
Nyerere became president and he decided to adopt the Chinese socialist way of
life where nothing belongs to you everything belongs to the state. So just
before we talk about that just so that I can grasp your life in the first 10
years of your life yeah yeah it was sundowners it was long vacations long
vacations sundowners obviously we weren't allowed these kids but we'd watch
you know road trips and holidays what about your schooling was that private? No no no we were at the
Aga Khan school and remember in December yes yes so that the educational system
was an elitist in that sense. But not Africans. No Africans? Only Indians. And only Indians? Yeah at the Aga Khan school yeah. So only Asmaelites?
mm-hmm no other yeah other other other Hindus and other races but no Africans
okay so if I can remember I don't think there were any Africans. Other religions so
that you could be Hindu Sikh? Yeah we used to go to the Hindu temple we used to go for
Diwali, Holi we used to go to the marriages and it was very very togetherness
you know it was a lovely life in a way because there was no hassle. What about
your friendship group because you have this grew up with these British
affiliations yeah were you friends with those white colonial children? No. Or did you
stay with the Asians? No we only met them in clubs you know in the clubs when we
went swimming or play tennis or that but no but most of my friends were
Asmaelites because it was a community was a centre of heart but our family was
very aloof people didn't like us very much because they thought we were very
apathy so if we'd go to the movies we'd have the first row of the cinema that's
what I'm saying you know kind of royalist so people were scared to come
in fact people were scared to come and talk to us and I said why won't you have
got many friends you know because they were actually not happy to talk to us
they wouldn't come to the big house they were scared and I just wondered why and
then coming to the UK and meeting them again they said you know we never came
to your big house why because it didn't feel right so no the my friends were my
cousins cousins group of three or four cousins and that was our group and so
there was no mixing with Africans not at that stage no and then in
1970 when this I was it now at secondary school in what you call my third year
was that in Ismaili secondary school no no it was it was a it was called Moanser
secondary school so it was mixed what whites Africans most of the whites went
to their own private school there were a couple who came but mainly Asians Indians
and then the Africans came as well so it was pretty mixed but that was an
interest that's when things really started changing because they nationalized
everything I'm going now into I was 13 at the time I was in secondary school and
and the year before that they nationalized because everything belonged
to the state so up until that point your grandfather passed so he was no longer
part of this colonial no it was all gone so it was just the family were just
working in the business yes which was the pop factory yeah we just know Coca
Cola Coca Cola hmm any other no so there was a Coca Cola factory yeah you
still had the land which Africans were living on yes there was no rent being
charged no thanks so that was great yeah then nationalization happened in 1970
after the independence yes 1971 yeah and then yeah so one night I could hear the
adults kind of getting very uppity things was tense and but you know as a
child nobody tells you what's going on oh you go to school it's fine but we
were always escorted to school always escorted back by we had drivers security
people and then my father decided oh so one day I'm coming home from school and
I see this big notice is saying property of the Tanzanian government and this was
on our house notices on our house so by that time they would have taken the
factory was the last to go because there was a big discussion between Coca Cola
and and government of Tanzania they wouldn't allow it eventually they took it
that's when my father left to go back to Kenya so you were saying about going
home from school yeah and I see all this notices now and Swahili so and then after
the time we were not allowed to speak Gujarati or English we had to speak
Swahili all the time if you were caught speaking those two languages don't you
in trouble everyone had to have the property of the president in their house
you are you have to go to every compulsory rally political rally if you
didn't turn up you were done for in school English went out of the window
everything was Swahili and army training we had to go over we had to go running
and beautiful tennis courts were made into fields of rice you know farming we
had to go in the fields and and dig for like I remember being deep in water
digging for rice in a paddy field as as teenager I was 13 and this was something
that everybody did yeah yeah and if anything happened they would blame the
Indians you know the Africans then of course they're the top end now I mean
they were oppressed you know that don't blame them they're the top hands at
school if they made if they made any mischief or the school the headmaster
was an army guy everybody was military and and if you if you make that they
made any mischief and then the headmaster was very strict it came in
and said okay who was it they would say the mohindi's the Indians and the only
three of us and we get punished really badly how would they punish you we had
to stand in the dug-up tennis court with stones in our hand in hot weather like
that for an hour arms outstretched yeah yeah yeah and then if you did that they
smacked you in the bum with a big cane oh yes it wasn't it wasn't very nice
that's when by this time my father has left to go to Nairobi because we'd lost
everything there was nothing there was some money saved there was nothing my
sisters were at school in boarding school in England I was the only one
left to go to boarding school but of course it wasn't going to happen so my
father was working in Nairobi I was working for as an accountant in
somebody's garage I can't remember the garage name anyway but it was a garage
so your father left you yeah and mother yeah with grandmother with grandmother
and certain certain other cousins but everybody else left some to go to Canada
some to come to England so it was only me my mother says just get out you know
because there was no future for the kids we had to go so my uncle went to
Vancouver with his children my aunt went to Vancouver they all left and some
some cousins came to the UK so then he had to get me out so he then the
that's when my adventure started because one day in school I was a cousin of mine
came it was lunchtime he said your mother said a really terrible accident
could be fatal we need you to come to the hospital and I was allowed out and
and I was and I said where we going that's not the way to the hospital he said no
you're going straight to the airport stuck a piece of paper in my hand it was
like a permit I wish I'd had it now which permit and said you're getting on
that plane go I didn't see my mother nobody you know nothing
whatever I had because because there was apparently now I found this out later
that there was a rumor that the members of that particular party they were called
TAMU Tanzania I can't remember but they were called T-A-M-U I cannot remember
they were they wanted to marry young Indian women you know we never
assimilated that we were friends that we would bring but we never married or we
kept our own community but then in Zanzibar particularly they abducted
young Indian girls and married them and there were six year old men with 13 14
year old girls so there was a rumor that they were going to do the same to us and
that's why they got me out so I was gone so you boarded that plane yes and then
we end up in Entebbe Airport so it didn't go straight to Nairobi it went to
enter it's a plane and it went to enter at that time Idy Amin was there as you
remember and we get out and this big big soldiers if you I mean sure you might
remember but you're too young bubbly huge huge soldiers they surrounded me
and said you under arrest why well the permit is all wrong or something anyway
they took me into this room and I said I said I'm that I mean 13 year old you
know fortunately there was a doctor on the plane who knew my family he must
have bribed them or something because he said he came to the room and said that
let's go let's go there's a jet waiting he's gonna take us to Nairobi and we
stopped doing Asian doctor Asian doctor was Ismaili or no Hindu no he was Muslim
doctor I mean and he just grabbed me and said let's go you know and we got on the
plane and I remember him giving me a glass of whiskey which I'd never had in
my life he said drink this I said what happened what happened he said just just
sit we are safe we are leaving you were a VC 10 I still remember it so vividly
running in the on the runway you'll see this big plane there anyway I get to
Nairobi and he said there's your father there I just fell into my father's arms
I said what the hell happened there he said it's fine you're safe now I've got
you booked in a school here but we must send you to England to join your
sisters but then he said to me there was no money so I'd have to do my own thing
you know I'd get I'd get a student visa to England to learn to where my sisters
lived but obviously I couldn't go to boarding school or university so that
was quite a lot to take on yeah a teen year old you know where's my mother yeah
where am I where am I what am I doing what am I gonna do and I said am I
living with you and he said oh no because I'm living in some lodgings you've
got to live with these people those strange people but I cried because you
know I didn't know who they were my home life in a few days was just gone did you
talk to your mum at all over that time I didn't I had it I didn't ever my mum was
too busy doing charity work I never actually had a relationship with my
mother I was more I was brought up by my grandmother and my aunts mother never
featured so as far as I was concerned she was my biological mother no I never
I didn't see her until I was 19 so yes so then I went to the Aga Khan Academy
in Nairobi and how was that for you it was great great again mixed did you feel
that you had recovered from that instance from moving from Tanzania yeah I
didn't feel anything I didn't I I mean once I got into school and my cousin
joined me at the school I was happy because my cousins were there in Nairobi
my cousin worked at the Aga Khan Hospital he was the chief accountant so I
had people I could be with you know and I made some friends in in in Nairobi and
then my dad said okay time to go to December 71 time to go to England you
know your visas already he'd got me a pop-up passport I didn't have this piece
of paper and I was on my way to England were you 1971 with the Ugandan Asians
actually it was British Caledonian I remember and he stopped over it was a
direct flight from Nairobi to Gatwick but it had a puncture problem or tire
problem so it had to stop over in Antebe I mean oh my god I'm back in Antebe you
know oh I'm so dead but I didn't get off the plane and then there's loads of
other Asians got on the plane I wonder what they're doing you know and I
remember it's Christmas time and Christmasy time and we got lentil
curry and rice for lunch on the plane yeah but you had no idea that there was
this expulsion going on so those Asians that were on the plane to Britain were
being hosted yeah on British Caledonian yeah with lentils and rice yes and
there's me thinking what is this place so full of Indians you know for Asians and
then I asked somebody I said why would you know you have me I said yeah he
people have all been kicked out everybody's out or who are British
subjects are out he wants us all gone how old were you then 14 how did that
make you feel when you heard that on the plane I was shocked and there's me going
you know to the UK I was I was I until later on in life I found out what
happened to us in Tanzania to me it was like a big adventure you know apart from
being arrested in Antibes but you know I said oh where am I going what am I
doing yes I was homesick from Monza but I said I would never go back you know
it'd be too hurtful but yeah so I'm getting off the plane get it get to the
man so this is how you came to the UK was to be expelled from Tanzania in a way
expelled in a way but you know left of my own accord really yeah oh you know
economic migrant if you encouraged encouraged to leave yeah entry yeah and
with your father this idea of Britain being a better place for you yes my
father loved Britain he he'd been here he lived here for four years in the 60s
and he loved it but then his family dynamics he never business he never went
back but my sisters were here already do you think the early colonial family
experience was an influence on you your father wanting the they were in a very
nice boarding school in Sussex you know I mean they weren't in some weird place
and you were already familiar with the culture to some degree yes to come to
the UK I was so used to the Queen's English that when I heard dialects and
and and and then I went to my sisters then my sister lived in Stevenage she
was a teacher then she qualified met children you in that way in that sense
yes but I hadn't seen them for such a long time I didn't recognize them at
the airport my oh oh god five six years seven years so you you landed in Gatwick
yeah came out and they and your family were to meet you yeah looking and
looking for my two sisters and then I saw them because I never had a
relationship with my sisters either because they'd left my older sister left
in 63 to come in the you to the UK my other sister left in 67 so I didn't know
my siblings really and then we went I said oh where's the snow this you have
this sort of Dickens type of in you know the up impression I said what's now
anyway we get back and they said listen you're not going to boarding school
because daddy has no money there's no money so you can go to the further
education college and do your own levels which is what I was doing in Nairobi but
you know the education in the UK and education in Kenya totally although we
did do the Oxford and Cambridge exams different different type of teaching but
anyway I did six old levels in six months which was a shocker you know I
don't know how I did it and then my father said look you've you've lost out
from the way your sisters have been taught in boarding school I would have
liked you to go to boarding school but unfortunately there's only enough money
for your sister to do pharmacy at at University and what would you do because
you are T and I said well I could do classic so you know and he said yeah
but what would you do after that she'd earn money you what would you do what
was what's the future for you and I said right well let's have the money and give
me some and I applied to this very posh college secretarial college in Oxford to
do a secretary's course do you remember the college name Oxford and County
Secretarial College it's now gone unfortunately but there's a ladies call
very strict oh you have to wear twin set pearls and we lived in the boarding
house and there were girls from every colonial you know and there was
discrimination I'll tell you because I was the only brown person there was a
Ghanaian ambassador's daughter so people the parents of these girls
complained that they did not because there were four to a dormitory and there
were two to a room you know for and we went the four and the next term when we
went up me and Josephine I remember her were in the same room because the
parents of those girls had complained that they did not want us to be in the
same room as we were not white that was my first sort of experience you know of
being what it was weird anyway we find life goes on you know carry on did you
feel that the secretarial college was actually hostile no they were they were
they actually took um they took they took the way angry with the parents but
what can you do you know when the parents are paying masses of money but
yeah but we only I only found out from one of the girls that that girls parents
girls parents objected anyway so we were I finished my secretarial course and and
we were headhunted by the BBC or the Foreign Office well I couldn't go to the
Foreign Office because I wasn't a British citizen then I was Kenyan so the
BBC wanted me but I was too young I was only 16 so they said go away for a year
but come back we have a job for you and they would get me the work permit so I
did that and then went to work for the BBC World Service after after after one
year out I lived in I went to went to Manchester where my sister lived she'd
married by then and she they'd moved to Manchester because her husband got a job
in the nuclear something or the other she's a nuclear engineer was he British
British bring and I went to live with them in Manchester outside Manchester
and I went to college there for a year and did English lit literature just
past the time really because I was just waiting for the BBC so was it unusual
for your sister to have married a British person no because we had already
had British people in in my cousin married a British guy the Congo cousins
all married Belgians so no and when I met my husband there was no problem my
grandmother my grandmother were first cousin to Mary when she brought her then
boyfriend home from England there was a lot of opposition and he could marry her
on the condition that he converted to Islam which he did so and my grandmother
said listen times are changing we can't be enclave into our own little you know
bit of society you've got to get out and if the kids want to marry out yes let
them so your grandma was with her sounds like she was quite forward-thinking yes
she was and not dogmatic about no religious and cultural practices being
kept in the family absolutely very liberal and you know she was strict she
was a strict grandmother but she was she was a good grandmother I would say where
would she've gotten this from my grandfather ideas from my grandfather
who was on board the colonial recommendations of the other cars yeah oh
yeah because he used to correspond with him all the time I mean unfortunately I
don't have it I don't know where it's gone I think there's some letters in my
drawer from from him from the young and the old yeah that's that's really quite
something yes and my grandmother was very big in some you know we have all
these little societies she was very big in something we used to get people
coming to the house and very secret to secret very Masonic and that's when
the young other when he was visiting in 1957 I wasn't born obviously but there's
a picture down there of him and you will see my grandmother looking at him and
when he came in 79 or something and she went up on the stage for we thought it
was in Elscourt here in London and she went up and he beamed at her and he was
like I said I said to my sister look at that he's beaming at her as if he knows
her you know he didn't know her he hasn't changed so yes and blessed her and blessed her
oh he was like it was with her for a long time it was really interesting and
when she died in Canada there was the aga Khan the mice like tripped over her
so she was important so despite the colonial aspect it was a very close
connection to the Ismaili Muslim culture absolutely yes and community yes yes we
followed all the traditions I mean you know it's a different world for the kids
because we had you know we were doing everything but the adults yes very much
so Jamaat Khana every day all the all the functions everything big donations
and he built a big Jamaat Khana in Mwanza yeah all influence of my
grandfather and our family fundraising things like that but obviously I was too
young and I wish my parents had told me all this because they never talked about
it ever. And was that out of an act of humility?
Yeah well that also and also I think my mother was so hell-bent on sending us
three girls because you remember the hierarchy that you're patriarchal you
know if you didn't have a son my grandfather was titled it was my
countryman it's my title and and obviously if my if my father had a son
the thing would pass to him but my father had three girls and he was always
this thing about you know his younger brother had a son so it was still very
patriarchal but anyway my mother was hell-bent that us three would get an
education you know and if they not to marry because otherwise what like I was
thinking what life would have been like if I was still in Africa would I be
married with two three children but no education you know what what would my
life have been like I don't know and here my mother say out you know she
wouldn't even teach us how to cook I said can you teach us how to cook no no
go study study I want you to get out I want you to go and get educated so you
stand on your own two feet you never depend on anyone ever where do you think
that came from that drive for independence to not even be my mother I
think my mother she came from a very high-class family in Dar es Salaam and
she married my father was a bit of a lout her words and when she came when
she married my father and she came to this Dar es Salaam was very sophisticated
and her sister-in-law her brothers they lived in South Africa so they were very
sophisticated and when she came to this little thing called Mwanza yes the big
house wasn't built then it was a little it was a little house you know tend to
tend to a space and the toy and she was like her trousseau was all from South
Africa silk and stuff and I said sister-in-law's all took it you know like
they were all my mother she did tell me they were so nasty and there's me
coming into this thing and we used to have a huge house in Dar es Salaam her
father ran hotels in Dar es Salaam and then she comes into this thing and she
thought that's it if I have any children they will never suffer what I went
through they'll go they'll be out gone independent never needing anyone to
rely on so which is she depending on my father didn't she and she was 21 years
old so by Indian standards she was too old to be some you know should have
married at 18 or 17 and there was my father she only saw him and she went
ill I said really I said I never want you to go through that again and that's
why out no I said but you never taught us how to cook she said now I said I
can't cook you know and she said that's fine you just study independence I want
you to have your own house your own thing never depend on anyone even your
own husband never that was a thing because of what she'd been through yes
and how do you how is that informed your life going forward as you moved through
living in Britain independent I mean yes I've married but I'm if you ask my
husband I'm totally my own person you know if he tells me grow your hair I'll
get it short that sort of thing it will not you know I respect him I love him
but he'll never ever take over my life or make me dependent on him I'm my own
person your mother could be called an Asian feminist in that sense and that's
something there's not really recognized in the West that no we have as Asian
women have gone through our generational struggles in different ways
liberated ourselves yes I mean I have obviously have family who are quite
narrow-minded my sister who was in her six seventies now young middle sister
has never married and my mother used to get things like you know oh look at your
daughter she's never married and the mother so she's got a business
multi-million business she's her own free woman if she wants to marry tomorrow
she can nothing to do with me don't tell me she was she was good like that so she
really went against the cultural norm yes or she had to listen to all the
she had to listen to all the taunts and the you know the hypocrisy or your
daughters you know look at them they married white people it was like that
with certain members of the family and community so that idea of being single
or marrying outside of the community the being independent are all things
that were frowned upon yes but my parents didn't care and that would you
say that that belonged more to Indian culture Indian as opposed to taking on
the doctrines of Ismailism difficult is my reason I would say that they took
that your parents took on their doctrines of Ismailism above and beyond
the Indian culture yes yes so tell me you were headhunted by the BBC yes I
worked at the World Service in the Swahili service and I was there for ten
years were you speaking Swahili then but you didn't have to really you know but
they got me a work permit in the meantime I'd met Michael at Oxford while
I was in Oxford at the college because the whole idea of going to that
college was to very rich Oxford graduates when I didn't I married a
decorator you know working-class decorator I mean his parents had never
seen a brown person ever the village was not very sort of you see this in
Midsomer murder you know you do so and and I said to Michael but you're gonna
meet I can I'm gonna meet your parents and he said yeah what's wrong and I
said well look at me I'm not white and he said yeah but they wouldn't mind and they
didn't and I was like oh and mr. Johnson his father was a Halifax
working-class man I'm really lovely I doled him and mother she used to very
strong woman again used to be well spitfires in the war you know and
independent again very independent of her husband taught her two sons well and
I married Michael and and I said to my mother you know did you I asked her one
she said the only time I thought about you marrying Michael is what color would
your children be that's about how I don't know might have been right might
have been wrong who knows I mean she adored my nephew who's quite brown you
know but he said that's the only thing I thought I never thought oh you know and
I was accepted by their family they never made me feel that I was you know I
was I was not different but you know talking to French talking to certain
friends especially in Wales they would say to me I would say but I'm the same
color as the person you are abusing and they go yeah but you're different you
talk differently you wear different clothes I said yeah but I'm the same
that's my culture I really should be doing that but I don't I said if you
came and saw me in a in a hijab or whatever would you be abusive good
answer my question that's really interesting that's very interesting you
know you're different that's all I could hear you're different you speak
differently you wear different clothes you're not like them just is the
inference then you're British overtly British you you presents as being
British as opposed to Indian or Pakistani or yes you know in your
traditional dress yes in your accents yes in the way you speak English yeah
in your manners in my mannerisms that I'm I'm British yes but I wear Indian
garb I wear I put henna on my hands oh there's a oh what's this have you got a
disease I don't know it's you know it's like a tattoo except that it's not
prominent don't be ignorant I said we live in a very global world now try
understand us but you know what is never gonna happen is it I mean my nephew was
now in his 40s has been racially abused he's very conscious of his color is our
coloring whereas my niece is very white with blondish mousy hair so he's dark
he swarthy has a very good job with Virgin Atlantic but even now he'll say
why are you living somewhere where there are no brown people why can't you live
with us I said well I like it here I like it here for the peace and quiet I'm not
concerned about what's out there you know and where is here in Manchester
okay because there's a big community there no I meant is why aren't you
living why am I living here in Wales in this in this enclave so of white people
so before we get into how you've got to be into Wales this is such a fascinating
story you were living in England I'm interested that you didn't apply for
citizenship when you arrived in the UK was that because it was not available
not available I would have to be I would have to be here for five years drop at
that time to then apply for British nationality but I married and I married
at the age of 19 I married Michael so that kind of took care of itself that
because you did it on in those days you became automatically became a British
citizen except that when we went to the home office this was funny and Michael
saying because he'd never seen Jews of people you know they asked me if my
marriage had been consummated because at that time you were too young probably
Asian you know the port Asian women into Indian women into and there were the
marriage wasn't country it was a marriage of convenience a lot was
happening then so this home office person asked me has your marriage been
consummated and Michael said what do you think and she said well we have to
ask if if are you prepared to be examined by a doctor oh yes are you
exam prepared to be examined by a doctor should we need to I said yeah why not go
ahead and they didn't but it was weird did you not feel offended yes what can
you do you know she's jumped the password and said welcome to Britain I
went really and I never felt at home in England I never did I never felt welcome
you know there was always this underlying something that I never felt I
didn't have a lot of friends in London you know and then of course I discovered
Wales but this is interesting that you said about never feeling at home in
England yeah despite presenting as British and having a lot of friends yes
I didn't have any smiley friends no all English so this is why I'm interested
why did you not feel at home because I don't know I just do something which is
making me feel not welcome yes they talked to me I was their mate there was
always this underlying you know something I can't put my finger in it
I've got this friend in London and she'll say to me no I went to see the
doctor today and he was black and you think so or he was brown I said so and
my cousin actually kicked her out of the house his house because he said she was
racist so he she's still good or the plumber came to the oh he was he was he
was black it's the way it was said yeah so I said so what do you think of me then
I'm brown how about you again you different and then you discovered Wales
yeah so I met some Welsh people when I was a whole year in Greece really nice
ladies older much older and they were really really loved the accent I loved
this thing songy accent and it was so funny and I said wait so you're doing
Wales she said don't tell me you're not mean I said no actually I haven't been
past sort of Oxford you know and she said oh Manchester and she said come
come to Wales she lived in Newport her friend lived in Kaleon and honestly
getting over this bridge which was then the seventh bridge I was like whoa this
is it this is me this is me I'm home even though of course I didn't know
anything about you know what was down there it was just something about I
don't know I can't express it it was the feeling of peace which I'd never known
in England so that's something that the Welsh landscape yes very much the light
something is that we go to France you see this light where they painted and
you think oh it was the same year I mean look at that the light and I thought
wow anyway that there was a long time ago but I used to visit I used to come
every month to Wales and they took me everywhere they brought me to the
valleys they brought me took me to Monmouthshire to Swansea remember Cardiff
Bay wasn't there wasn't there then it was a dump if you remember 30 years ago
35 years ago was when you first came to Wales then you were privileged enough to have experienced the real
Tiger Bay yes and that's something that's yes historically again you know I said to
my so this is your immigrant area and she said yeah but we don't go there it's
dangerous I said okay fine no but I saw a lot of ways and really Cardiff is great it's a
city but I love the mountains I love the mountains every time they brought me up
to and then we came this way we went to Blennaf and I could easily live here oh
it's a tough life I said oh I could easily live here of course for work I'd
have to be in Cardiff or the city but anyway things changed and I didn't make
it because we went to America instead my sister lived in the Cayman Islands and I
went to live in the Cayman Islands for three months to be with her I said to my
husband I'm off I'm tired of London I'm going I'm going to the Cayman's okay
bye then see you oh if I went to live with him in Cayman Islands for three
months then came back she then got headhunted to Florida and to a big
pharmaceutical something or the other company and so we visited Florida I would
go to Florida three or four times a year Michael wouldn't but I would and
eventually he said oh I want to live there so we decided to make a move after
my parents passed away we looked after my parents and again as a white man he
didn't know how to look after you know they don't have that relationship family
dynamic like we do because I said to him I said if you marry me you're marrying
my family you know that don't you because we'll be around and he said yeah
I don't mind and he really helped my parents both of them both of them were
very fond of Michael and he helped his mother as well he's got a good heart so yes so we went to
America for 2004 to 2011 had a business over there but the American Embassy
didn't like it so we were back.
What was your experience like in America? Did you feel welcome? Did you enjoy California?
Florida.
Florida sorry.
Yes but the people were very strange you met the very mad part of Florida and you
had the very kind of Republican oh they were not very nice but they were all my
clients they were the rich ones I mean I'd get hundred dollar three hundred
dollar tips to do just a bit of work for them you know.
What was your business?
It was it was doing well it was a wellness clinic natural means by
like therapy so if you had an injury or if you fell down or you were downside
lot of dancers a lot of runners would come in within three four treatments
they were back on because you know when you when you got a big injury you'd be
out for six seven months these weren't three months later though I mean they
It's very big in Canada in the US there's some places in London that do it
but it hasn't got on here because the pharmaceuticals won't let you they want
you to have the medicines why should you I had trouble with the pharmaceuticals
in America oh yeah yeah yeah and the and the medics because oh it doesn't work
that I said look at the look at the risk look at the research this has been going
on for ages they're now doing you know a little laser therapy where it's not so
not so invasive and you get well quickly rather than being cut it's the same thing
but this is cold laser that's hot laser I said we're going on for ages it's
proof it was a struggle it was a struggle out there and you said you had
the crazy part of yeah there were the the well I wouldn't say it because
people thought I was crazy as well okay so I'm putting myself in that category
so the holistic people so although I was I was running a scientific thing to me
it was holistic and I had you know massage therapist doing things you know
diggily-diggily things and and it was a bit of a mixture because Florida
actually up north is very holistic lots of therapists yes some good some bad you
know a lot of chakra readings and a lot of some things are very weird I must say
but you know I couldn't get my head around it but and I'm I think I'm quite
spiritual I I feel things I feel like I'm at you I suddenly sudden you walked
in the room I thought whoa I feel a connection here you know and a lot of
people I don't but yeah you were involved with some crazies I must say
and then my drum beating you know and drum and Michael Michael you're
completely crazy you've got me a nut job you know I said look it pleases me okay
it pleases me I believe I believe I'm I'm an open book I love everything the
strangest thing here in Wales was I went to there's a sacred shop there of
crystals and stuff and every Monday we used to go there and she was a palm
Easter tarot person of spiritual person and this one morning she had an Ouija
board now I've never seen one before heard of them they call it the spiritual
board okay so she said you put your finger on the thingy and it moves so she
said who are you very dear to I said my grandfather and she said all right ask
him if he's here and honestly that thing moved and said yes I said what is your
name and he spelled his name for me allowed him now I'm with a bunch of
white people yeah if it's a John Smith I'd question it but when he said allowed
in and I said when did you die and he said 6th of February 1962 at that point
I let go I couldn't believe it so you found this kind of spiritual practice
out in Aberdeer in Wales that you've not experienced quite ever so it's quite
phenomenal yeah that this is tell me a bit about you landing in Wales then okay
so when we came back America obviously the American Embassy refused us the
business visa so we had to leave so we had to sell apartment I just sort out
the business can come back to Oxford and where Michael's from and we lived with
his mum for a bit because I didn't want to live with mum for a bit but anyway
she had to go into a nursing home and I said to Michael I think it's time now
it's time to move to Wales and my friend Debbie who had moved from London to
Wales and married a Welshman lived in Bridgend and she had a cottage in
Astrod and she said you know what you're doing in Oxford wasting time you know
you want to come to Wales I'm offering you that cottage come try it for a year
if you don't like it go back you know well you're well to oyster now you can
do what you want and I said okay so we came to this cottage and after she'd
done it up and I loved it I loved and you know her friend Hillary took us up
to the book not the rigors and we stood there and you're looking at all this
mountains and the Brecon's oh my god and every I still see this view and I can't
get over it I cannot I see it and I go oh I can't believe this how beautiful it
is despite your memories of East Africa and all the road trips yeah here in
Wales you're blown away yes landscape never mind the Serengeti and all the
lovely places we know this is it for me I'm gonna die here I mean honestly it is
it and the and the beaches and the ocean you know and we go to St. David's
to see our friends and we go to Ogmore where Debbie is and he's like I don't
want to leave well you know you're just going over the bridge to England when he
says welcome to him I go that's that's how it happens and then you come back to
Wales this is crazy summary we back isn't that terrible it's delightful I
think oh my god and Michael looks at you completely mad I don't think I'm
gonna leave this little house yeah might end up somewhere else no I think
there's pressure to move to Manchester to be near the community I think for the
Asians who live in Wales and my father is was one of them yeah had this ex the
same experience yeah of this homecoming yeah this welcome yeah that you don't
experience anywhere else in person I feel exactly the same yeah whenever I
come to from England yeah yeah I know my place is here is here yeah up to this
point so in it you've had such a journey and so many life experiences and these
ups and downs you know having a business not having a business taking care of
your family taking care of your in-laws having places to live not having places
to live not having money not having passports yeah displaced what does
resilience mean to you now am I am I as resilient as I as I was then I think
then now I feel I feel not so strong maybe I'm getting older I don't know but
then it was like a big adventure you know everything was an adventure I
treated it like an adventure I think I wouldn't have survived if I hadn't been
so resilient and I think it's thanks to my mom who just tell me go you you you
don't need to depend on anyone you need to go stand on your own two feet and I
always remember that go and my sisters both of them too so this idea of being
a need to be independent very has been the thing that has given you has been
the source of your resilience yes yes never never never I'm saying never obey
I mean even with my dad when he went eventually when they came to live in
England because they live they left they left Kenya soon after to go to India but
they didn't like it because they couldn't assimilate with the Indians they
said they were they're really different I went but dad we're all Indians he said no
we're not you need to come and look but we didn't go never been to India but then
we decided that going live in Portugal and they loved Portugal so again I went
if the colonial thing you know that loved loved Portugal they lived in near
near the sea Nestor real and there was a Jamaat Khan in Portugal they loved it
until they both got poorly and then came back came to you can't live yeah after
that was time and how easy was it for them to come from Portugal into the UK
very at that time they came as our dependence applied for dependency as long
as they did not ask the government for anything I said no we have a house we
have money we have resources now and so no they'll be totally reliant on on me
and my husband and we built us we built a further story on our house so they
could have their own bedroom bathroom we had our own space very together and and
we did everything else together they've got to they've got to mosque on Fridays
we didn't obviously and we had a dog not a mad dog like the one you've got now
but smaller dog my mom was really fond of the dog yeah and then of course they
both got poorly and passed away so that actually goes against the stereotypes of
how people come to the UK and why they come to the UK and a lot of that is
about claim benefits yeah having free housing and so on but you supported your
parents and through their illnesses never ever I until now that I'm now
getting a pension I don't think it's a benefit I think it's my entitlement for
working 35 years in this country and paying tax never did my parents got
claim any benefit until my father was dying and the social workers said you
know you can get something called attendance allowance and he went what's
that then and I said but we're not allowed to I said I've signed a paper
with the home office still got it I went to dad okay you want to take it I said
if we get caught then I'll have to pay it back you know that when we died and
all the money went back all right but he got he got benefits he didn't want them
I didn't want them because I'd signed a condition with the home office that he'd
never be dependent from the state and this was a recommendation from a white
social worker British social worker so they were getting something attendance
I can't remember attendance allowance keep it because I might have to give it
back because this is not right and then they were asked for it I give it to
charity give it all to Marie Curie yeah and just before we kind of wrap things
up I'm curious would you you said that you've never been to India would I ever
go you mean and would you ever go back to East Africa I think it would hurt too
much I think I took Michael when we married I wanted him to see but only to
Kenya but things were different I said this this is what I really but they do
we did the right thing you know Safari and all that and all that but I left that
I got on the plane and I was so upset I thought I can't come back I don't know
if I can go back it would be too hurtful my cousins go all the time even my
cousins have just come back from Monza and they show me it's now a city of 1
million people and it hurts to see it like that you know I think oh my god
those happy days by the lake watching the crocodiles and watching the hippo
local hippo come and and now it's nothing there so gone one a city of 1
million people when it used to be about 10,000 and it was very close to nature
yes because you could hear at night this is what I'll never forget it's the
sounds of the drums you see you lying there and you hear a lion roar and you
hear a leopard roar and then you hear the of the drums and I was with the drums
of Africa and I thought that sound will never leave me until I die so in a way I
think do I say I'm an African or I'm British I just say I'm a universal
citizen because Africa means the world to me it really does but we had to leave
and it's sad you okay thank you very much okay thank you very much it's okay
it's beautiful I haven't said anything stupid all right